API success → how do you validate DB?
API vs DB data mismatch — debug it.
API → queue → DB — how do you automate?
Eventual DB consistency — how do you test?
Duplicate API request — how do you validate DB?
Two concurrent updates — how do you test?
Two users booking last seat — how do you test?
Partial DB failure — how do you verify rollback?
API 500 — how do you check partial DB data?
How do you test DB constraints?
How do you test a stored procedure?
How do you test a DB migration?
How do you verify an UPDATE changed only intended rows?
API DELETE → how do you verify DB state?
How do you validate 100 API records against DB?

How do you identify duplicate DB records?
How do you identify orphan records?
How do you find orders without order items?
How do you find latest record per customer?
How do you validate API → DB data transformation?
How do you validate timestamps?
Soft delete vs physical delete — how do you test?
How would you test cascade deletion?
How would you test transaction isolation?
How would you reproduce a dirty read?
How would you test a deadlock?
What if primary DB and replica return different data?
DB becomes slow during automation — how investigate?
500 k6 users create records — how validate DB correctness?
Production has inconsistent records — how investigate?


Category 1 — API-to-DB Validation Scenarios

(Most common for Playwright/Cypress background SDETs)

Q1. "You call a POST /register API. How do you verify the user data was actually saved correctly in the database?"

Expected answer structure:

Call the API with a known test payload
Fire a SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'test@example.com'
Assert: name matches, email matches, password is NOT plaintext (hashed), created_at is populated, user_id is auto-generated and unique, mandatory fields are NOT NULL
Assert NO duplicate row exists for the same email
In Playwright: use a DB client (node-postgres / mysql2) in a test fixture's afterEach to query and assert

Q2. "A PUT /users/:id API says it updated successfully (200 OK). How do you confirm the update actually hit the database?"

Expected answer:

After the API returns 200, run SELECT field FROM users WHERE id = :id
Compare returned value with what was sent in the request body
Also verify updated_at timestamp changed
Verify no other fields were accidentally modified (the update didn't wipe unrelated columns)

Q3. "A DELETE /orders/:id API returns 204. What DB checks do you run?"

Expected answer:

SELECT * FROM orders WHERE id = :id → should return 0 rows (hard delete), OR status = 'deleted' (soft delete)
Check for orphan records: SELECT * FROM order_items WHERE order_id = :id → should also be cleaned up, or FK cascade should have handled it
If soft delete: verify the deleted_at column is populated, is_deleted = true, but the row still exists
Category 2 — Referential Integrity / Orphan Records

(Confirmed in GFG DB testing lists and multiple SDET interview prep guides)

Q4. "A customer is deleted from the system. How do you test what happens to their orders?"

Expected answer:

Identify the FK relationship: orders.customer_id → customers.id
Three valid behaviors, you test whichever is defined:
CASCADE DELETE: SELECT * FROM orders WHERE customer_id = :deleted_id → 0 rows
SET NULL: order rows exist but customer_id is NULL
RESTRICT/ERROR: the delete should have failed — test that the API returned a 4xx, not 204
The worst case to catch: delete succeeds, orders still exist with a customer_id pointing to a non-existent customer — that's an orphan record bug
sql
-- Orphan record check query
SELECT o.* FROM orders o
LEFT JOIN customers c ON o.customer_id = c.id
WHERE c.id IS NULL;

Q5. "How do you test for orphan records in a production-like database?"

Expected answer: For foreign key constraints, try to insert or delete records in a way that would break the referential integrity and verify that the database prevents this. The SQL approach is a LEFT JOIN anti-join pattern:

sql
SELECT child.* FROM child_table child
LEFT JOIN parent_table parent ON child.parent_id = parent.id
WHERE parent.id IS NULL;

If this returns rows, orphan records exist. This is a real bug you'd file.

Category 3 — Transaction / ACID Scenarios

(CommVault SDET explicitly asked ACID + GFG database testing lists confirm this pattern)

Q6. "A payment goes through (money is deducted) but the order is not placed. How would you test for this?"

This is the classic ACID atomicity scenario. Expected answer:

This is an atomicity failure — the transaction committed partially
A correct implementation wraps both operations (debit account + create order) in a single transaction. If order creation fails, the debit must rollback
Test: simulate a failure in order creation (kill the DB connection mid-transaction, or inject a deliberate error), then verify the account balance was NOT reduced
SQL check after failure: SELECT balance FROM accounts WHERE user_id = :id — should be unchanged

Q7. "Two users simultaneously try to book the last available seat/ticket. What do you test?"

This is concurrency + isolation. Expected answer:

This is a Lost Update problem if not handled. Both read available_seats = 1, both decrement, both write → count goes to -1
Test: fire two concurrent API requests for the same resource
DB check: SELECT available_seats FROM events WHERE id = :id — should be 0, never -1
The fix is either: SELECT FOR UPDATE (pessimistic locking), or optimistic locking with version numbers
Relate this to Dirty Read scenario: one transaction sees uncommitted data from another — e.g., user sees "booking confirmed" before the transaction commits

Q8. "How do you test ROLLBACK behaviour in a failed transaction?"

Expected answer:

Execute a multi-step operation (e.g., transfer funds: debit A, credit B)
Inject a failure between step 1 and step 2 (network cut, constraint violation, etc.)
After the failure, query both accounts: neither should have changed
BEGIN → UPDATE account_a → [simulate failure] → ROLLBACK → both rows unchanged
Category 4 — Duplicate Data Scenarios

(Info Edge Naukri interview explicitly asked: "count the number of duplicate values in a table")

Q9. "How do you find duplicate records in a table? Give me the SQL."

Use GROUP BY with HAVING COUNT(*) > 1. This is the direct answer from Naukri interview data.

sql
-- Find duplicate emails in users table
SELECT email, COUNT(*) as count
FROM users
GROUP BY email
HAVING COUNT(*) > 1;

Q10. "A unique constraint exists on the email column. How do you test it's enforced?"

Expected answer:

Insert a valid user with email = 'a@test.com'
Attempt to insert a second user with the same email
Assert: second INSERT fails with a constraint violation error (DB-level), and the API returns a 409 Conflict (app-level)
Verify only one row exists: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM users WHERE email = 'a@test.com' → 1
Category 5 — Stored Procedure / Trigger Testing

(CommVault SDET asked triggers explicitly)

Q11. "How would you test a stored procedure that calculates interest and inserts the result?"

To test stored procedures: understand the requirement, execute scenarios that invoke the procedure, validate outputs against expected results including data changes and returned values, check error handling, and evaluate performance under different loads.

Practical answer:

Call the procedure with known inputs: EXEC calculate_interest @account_id = 101, @rate = 5.0
Query the result table: SELECT * FROM interest_log WHERE account_id = 101
Verify the calculated value matches the expected formula
Test with NULL inputs, zero rate, negative values — error handling
Test boundary: maximum balance, minimum rate

Q12. "How do you verify a trigger fired after a row was updated?"

Expected answer:

Update the parent row that should trigger the trigger
Query the audit log table or the table the trigger writes to
By querying the common audit logs, you can verify whether a trigger fired or not.
Example: UPDATE orders SET status = 'shipped' WHERE id = 101 → then SELECT * FROM audit_log WHERE order_id = 101 ORDER BY created_at DESC → verify a new audit entry was created with the right old_status and new_status
Category 6 — Data Migration / Count Reconciliation

(ETL/migration scenario confirmed across multiple SDET data sources)

Q13. "Source DB has 10,000 records. After migration, target has 9,995. How do you debug?"

Check load logs for rejected records, verify constraints (e.g., duplicates, data truncation), and reconcile record counts per partition or batch.

Full answer approach:

Check migration logs for rejected/failed records with reasons
Find the 5 missing rows: compare source IDs vs target IDs
sql
   SELECT id FROM source_table
   EXCEPT
   SELECT id FROM target_table;
Check if those 5 rows violated a constraint (unique email, NOT NULL field that was NULL in source)
Verify data types didn't truncate (VARCHAR(50) in source, VARCHAR(30) in target)
Verify row count per partition/batch if it was a chunked migration

Q14. "How do you verify data integrity after a DB migration?"

After migration, verify that the data in the target database is accurate, complete, and consistent with the source database. This involves running checks on row counts, key values, and referential integrity. 
H2K Infosys

Checklist answer: row count match, primary key uniqueness in target, no NULL in mandatory fields, FK relationships intact, spot-check 10–20 records field-by-field, aggregate checks (total order value in source = total order value in target).

Category 7 — Performance / Slow Query Scenarios

(Senior role signal question — appears in SDET-2 prep guides)

Q15. "A query that used to return in 200ms is now taking 8 seconds on the same table. What do you check?"

Expected answer sequence:

Has the data volume grown? (Table scan on 1M rows vs 10K rows)
Is the index missing or dropped? SHOW INDEXES FROM orders — verify the index on the column in the WHERE clause exists
Run EXPLAIN / EXPLAIN ANALYZE on the query — check if it shows a full table scan instead of an index scan
Were recent schema changes made? New column, dropped index, changed data type?
Are there lock contentions? Another process holding a write lock on the table?
Check query itself: is it using SELECT * instead of specific columns? Is there a missing WHERE clause after a code change?
Category 8 — Security Scenarios

(Appears in SDET interview prep data, especially for senior roles)

Q16. "How do you test for SQL injection in a login form?"

Expected answer:

Input ' OR '1'='1 in the username field — if the login succeeds without a valid password, the app is vulnerable
Input '; DROP TABLE users; -- — verify the table is not dropped (parameterized queries prevent this)
Verify the backend uses prepared statements / parameterized queries, not string concatenation
Check the DB doesn't expose raw error messages to the user (information leakage)

Q17. "How do you verify passwords are not stored in plaintext in the DB?"

Expected answer:

Create a user with password Test@1234
Query the DB: SELECT password FROM users WHERE email = 'test@example.com'
The stored value should be a hash (bcrypt/argon2/SHA), not the literal string Test@1234
Verify the hash length (bcrypt hashes are exactly 60 characters)
Two users with the same password should have different hashes if salted correctly